When the Seven Years' War ended in 1763, the only certainty about constitutional arrangements within the large, extended polity that constituted the early modern British Empire was their uncertainty. The balance of authority between the center and the peripheries remained undefined. Recurrent disputes over the extent of the crown's colonial authority had left that issue unresolved, and the nature of Parliament's relation to the colonies had never been explicitly examined. As Massachusetts Governor Francis Bernard remarked in August 1764, the relationship of the "Subordinate Governments ... to the Sovereign power" had "never been formally settled" and was certainly not "generally understood."1 Parliament's efforts to impose taxes on the colonies in the mid-i76os precipitated the first intensive and systematic exploration of this problem on either side of the Atlantic. Ostensibly, the issue raised by these efforts, especially by the Stamp Act of 1765, was no more than whether, in the succinct words of Bernard, "America shall or shall not be Subject to the Legislature of Great Britain." But the controversy rapidly moved on to a more general level. In the process, it provoked a broad-ranging consideration of fundamental issues involving the nature of the constitutional relationship between Britain and the colonies and the distribution of power within the empire. Far from producing either a theoretical or a practical resolution of these issues, however, the Stamp Act crisis of 1764-66 revealed a deep rift in understanding between the center and the peripheries that would never be bridged within the structure of the empire.2 Historians have tended to agree that the administration of George Grenville had no doubts about the legitimacy of its actions when it initiated these efforts in the late winter of 1764. But Grenville's speech introducing his American measures suggests otherwise. No M.P. rose to challenge the legitimacy of his proposals. Indeed, one observer reported that they "gained the applause of the whole House." Yet, by acknowledging that "the path" might be "thorny," Grenville betrayed both an awareness of the novelty of those proposals and a pronounced uneasiness about the negative reception they might receive in the colonies. As Bernard would later remark, Grenville and his aides could scarcely have failed to realize "that such an Innovation as a Parliamentary Taxation would cause a great Alarm & meet with much Opposition in most parts of America."3 Some metropolitan supporters later admitted that the Stamp Act was the "first Instance of parliament's imposing an internal tax upon the colonies for the single purpose of a revenue." For at least three decades, however, metropolitan officials had casually assumed that Parliament's colonial authority was unlimited. For over a century. Parliament had routinely laid duties upon colonial exports and imports for the purposes of regulating trade. But it was also true that parliamentary legislation for the colonies had been confined almost entirely to commercial and other economic regulations of general scope. The only precedent for a tax for any other purpose was the Post Office Act of 1710, and that measure, as William Beckford, the wealthy Jamaican sugar planter and M.P., noted on the floor of the House of Commons, had "certainly [been] for the convenience of the colonies themselves." If there were no clear precedents for Parliament's taxing the colonies for revenue before the Stamp Act, neither had anyone ever explicitly articulated a theoretical justification for the exertion of parliamentary authority in that area.4 Because of the traditional link between taxation and representation in British constitutional thought and practice, this problem was potentially troublesome—for metropolitans as much as for colonials. Indeed, metropolitan disquiet over this problem was clearly revealed during the Stamp Act crisis by proposals from several writers for colonial representation in Parliament. More important, the Grenville administration itself implicitly acknowledged the importance of this problem by the pains it took to deal with it. During the winter of 1764-65 in the months preceding the final passage of the Stamp Act, Grenville's lieutenant, Thomas Whately, ingeniously developed the doctrine of virtual representation, according to which the colonists, like those individuals and groups who resided in Britain but had no voice in elections, were nonetheless virtually represented in Parliament.5 When Grenville first brought the proposal for colonial stamp duties before Parliament the previous March, however, neither he nor Whately had apparently yet applied this doctrine to the colonies, and he tried to finesse the problem created by the lack of colonial representation in Parliament with a simple—and categorical—assertion of Parliament's right. Indeed, by insisting on that occasion that Britain had "an inherent right to lay inland duties there," Grenville himself first raised the question of parliamentary right. In addition, by going out of his way to assert that the "very sovereignty of this kingdom depends [up]on it," he also managed to establish the framework within which most metropolitans would subsequently consider the issue by ensuring that they would thenceforth interpret colonial opposition to the exertion of that right as a challenge not simply to the authority of Parliament per se but to the sovereignty of the metropolis in general.6 As soon as it was raised, the specter of parliamentary taxation stimulated "great inquiry and some apparent puzzle" in the colonies.

That it was both "new and unprecedented" most colonial leaders seemed to agree. In the "long period of more than one hundred and fifty years" since the founding of the colonies, the Pennsylvania lawyer John Dickinson subsequently remarked, "no statute was ever [previously] passed [by the British Parliament] for the sole purpose of raising a revenue on the colonies." If, however, the entire subject "had never been canvassed before" and was "yet new to the whole British Nation," few colonists seem to have doubted that, at least from their perspective in the peripheries, it was obviously unconstitutional.7 Beginning with their earliest protests against the proposed Stamp Act, they insisted that no community of Englishmen and their descendants could be taxed without their consent, an exemption they claimed "as their Right" and not "as a Privilege." "To be subject to no . . . taxation . . . but [that] which is authorized by the representative body of each society in concert with the representative of the crown presiding over it," declared the Barbados Assembly, was "a privilege which we imagined the subjects of Great Britain had been particularly entitled to in every settlement, however distant, of the British Empire as a birthright and blessing indeed capable of making every settlement, even the most distant of that Empire[,] grateful to a British spirit." Throughout the entire British world, the colonists asserted, in the peripheries as well as at the center, representation was the only basis for the authority to tax. Because Parliament represented only the inhabitants of Britain, it necessarily followed that its taxing power did "not extend ... to such parts of the British dominions as are not represented in that grand legislature of the nation."8 They dismissed the idea of virtual representation out of hand.

Founded on no more secure foundation than "a Defect in the Constitution of England," namely, the "Want of a full Representation in Parliament of all the People of England," the "Phantasie of virtual Representation," they declared, was obviously a "far-fetched" notion "of late date" that had been fabricated for the sole purpose of arguing the colonists "out of their civil Rights." If they were virtually represented in 1765, the colonists contended, they must always have been so, and if they had always been represented, why for a century and more, as one anonymous writer asked, had "the Mother Country . . . continually applied to the assemblies of the various provinces, whenever she wanted their assistance?" Indeed, he queried, why in the first place had she granted "a provincial legislature to her Colonies, and from the time of their first existence, invested them] . . . with the sole power of internal taxation?"9 Besides, they complained, the very concept was incompatible with that ancient and basic British constitutional principle that no tax could be "justly laid on any People . . . when the People taxed have not contributed to the Law, and agreed by their Representatives to receive it." Quoting Joseph Addison to show that in the British tradition true liberty always required a community of interest between legislators and constituents, an anonymous Barbadian pointed out that this notion of a "common interest" was so fundamental to the British constitution that it even extended "beyond the legislative Line, into the civil Administration of Justice. Juries to determine on a Point of Life and Property," he observed, "must come in a Manner qualified for the Office, by having lived in the Neighbourhood of the Party" under prosecution. Thus, in "Cases of [both] Taxations and Verdicts," he noted, a "Man's Neighbours alone" were, according to British constitutional practice, the only people who had "an exclusive Right to determine all his Questions." Hence, it seemed evident to this writer that virtual representation was "a Notion no less absurd than virtual Neighbourhood would be, if set up in a Court of Law." "To have any Authorityhe concluded in quoting David Hume, "a Law . . . must be derived from a Legislature which has a right"; for a legislature to have a right, it had to have a common interest and a direct connection with the people for whom it presumed to legislate.10 For people in the peripheries of an extended polity like that of the early modern British Empire, this emphasis upon the local foundations of both legislative and judicial authority made sense, and, whatever Parliament might declare, few colonists had any doubt that their rights as Englishmen demanded both that they be exempt from taxes levied in a distant metropolis without their consent and that their own local assemblies have an exclusive power to tax them. Indeed, as most colonial leaders seem to have recognized, the "exclusive Right" of the assemblies to tax the colonies constituted "what the Lawyers call the very Git of the Colony Argument."11 In analyzing the colonial response to the Stamp Act crisis, most scholars have tended to treat the colonists' claims as demands for their individual rights as Englishmen, as indeed they were. But this emphasis has tended to obscure the very important extent to which, especially during the Stamp Act crisis, the colonists seem to have believed that, as Robert W. Tucker and David C. Hendrickson have recently reminded us, "there could be no effective guarantee of individual rights without the effective guarantee of collective rights (or powers)," which they thought of as virtually synonymous with "the rights of the provincial assemblies." As was stressed in earlier chapters, the status and authority of the assemblies had "always been the central issue in the imperal-colonial relationship." Whereas earlier the conflict had been between the assemblies and the crown, it was now between the assemblies and Parliament. In view of the close relationship in colonial thinking between individual rights and corporate rights, it is by no means an exaggeration to argue, as do Tucker and Hendrickson, " that the central issue raised by the measures of the Grenville ministry concerned the role and power of the provincial assembly."12 Throughout the Stamp Act crisis, colonial spokesmen put enormous stress upon the traditional conception of their assemblies as the primary guardians of both the individual liberties of their constituents and the corporate rights of the colonies. Noting that it was precisely because their great distance from the metropolis had prevented them from being either fully incorporated into the British nation or repre-sented in the metropolitan Parliament that "their own assemblies" had been "established in its stead," they insisted that each of their own local legislatures enjoyed full legislative authority and exclusive power to tax within its respective jurisdiction. "As the legislative, deliberative body" in each colony, the assembly, in the words of former Massachusetts Governor Thomas Pownall, represented the collective "will of that province or colony."13 This identification of individual rights with the corporate rights of the assemblies ran right through the entire colonial argument. Thus the Connecticut Assembly argued against Parliamentary taxation on the grounds that it would both deprive its constituents of "that fundamental privilege of Englishmen whereby, in special, they are denominated a free people" and, no less important, leave them with "no more than a show of legislation." "May it not be truly said in this case," it asked, "that the Assemblies in the colonies will have left no other power or authority, and the people no other freedom, estates, or privileges than what may truly be called a tenancy at will; that they [will] have exchanged, or rather lost, those privileges and rights which, according to the national constitution, were their birthright and inheritance, for such a disagreeable tenancy?"14 But the colonists based their claims for exemption from parliamentary taxation not merely on "their right to the general principles of the British constitution" and certainly notjust on "the [many] royal declaration^] and grant[s] in their favor" in their charters from the crown.

They also grounded those claims on "Prescription, or long Usage, which," they insisted, was "generally understood to give Right." "Ever since the first establishment of . . . civil government" in the colonies "to the presenttime," they argued, "for more than 100 years," they had "uniformly exercised and enjoyed the privileges of imposing and raising their own taxes, in their provincial assemblies"; and those privileges, they asserted, had been "constantly . . . acknowledged, and allowed to be just in the claim and use thereof by the crown, the ministry, and the Parliament." Originally confirmed "by solemn acts of government," their rights, one writer declared in language redolent of the colonists' ancient disputes with crown authorities, had thus subsequently been "sanctified by successive usage, grounded upon a generous reliance on English Faith and Compact, and that usage—ratified by repeated authoritative acquiesence." Such "constant and uninterrupted usage and custom," it seemed to them, was, in the best tradi-tions of English constitutional development, "sufficient of itself to rriak<- a constitution/' In these appeals to their rights as Englishmen, their charters, and long-standing custom, colonial spokesmen were merely turning against Parliament the defenses they and their ancestors had developed over the previous century to protect colonial rights against abusers of prerogative.15 Whatever the sources of the legislative authority of the assemblies, th<- most significant questions posed by the new intrusion of Parliament into the domestic affairs of the colonies—the most vital issues raised by the Stamp Act crisis viva-vis the constitutional organization of the early modern British Empire—were how extensive that authority was and how it related to the authority of the British Parliament, lew colonists could accept the metropolitan position that there were no limits to Parliament's colonial authority. They did not deny that Parliament's power was extraordinary. They knew that, at least within Britain, its privileges were- then "as undetermined as were formerly th<- Prerogatives of the Crown." just as the prerogative had eventually been "fixed and settled," however, "So in like Manner," they believed, "ought all other C laims of Privilege to be," including those of Parliament. "Power of every Sort has its Boundary," an anonymous Barbadian dec Jared in arguing that it "would tend to the Happiness of aJJ English Subjects" if Parliament's "Privileges were as well known and ascertained as the Prerogatives of the Crown." "To presume to adjust the- boundaries of the power of Parliament" might be beyond its competence, the Massachusetts House of Representatives admitted in October 1765, but it had no doubt that "boundaries there undoubtedly are,"16 In trying to fix for themselves the boundaries of parliamentary authority, colonial spokesmen carefully distinguished between power and authority, l or a legislature to have "Authority," they argued, it "must have- a Right over the Persons whomsoever it may affect," and such a right, they believed, could only be "derived by Compact, and must have a legal and open Commencement" that "carried with it not only Marks of Notoriety, but of the Consent of all Parties." Nor, they contended, could that compact be changed without the mutual consent of all parties. Consent was thus not merely "a bare Circumstance to the- Rise and vesting of Authority." It was "the very Essence of . . . jurisdiction." Without it, a legislature had no authority, and its actions could be "supported on no other Base than Power." However great had been the increase in Parliament's authority as a result of the constitutional changes that had occurred in England since the founding of the colonies, those changes were perforce confined to the "People of England only" and had "nothing to do with" the colonies— unless the colonists had themselves consented to them. Great as was the "Power of Parliament," its colonial authority was therefore necessarily confined to those areas in which the colonies had given their consent.17 But what were these areas and how could they be described? A few colonists concluded that there were no areas in which Parliament had "lawful authority over" the colonies. The delegation of legislative power to the colonies, they believed, had to be "considered not only as uncurrent with, but as exclusive of all parliamentary participation in the proper subjects of their legislation, that is to say, in cases not repugnant to the laws of Great-Britain." According to this line of argument, Parliament had "no power but what is delegated to them by their constituents," and because those constituents had "no power over our liberty and property," it followed both that the authority of Parliament was "(over these things at least) . . . purely local, and confined to the places they are chosen to represent," and, as at least one writer asserted, that any exertion of that authority over the colonies was "most inconsistent with civil liberty."18 But most colonists took a far more cautious approach to this subject. They neither claimed "an independent legislature" nor denied that the colonies were "all subordinate to and dependent upon the mother country." Rather, most seem to have agreed with the Maryland lawyer Daniel Dulany that because the colonies were "dependent upon Great Britain," the "supreme authority vested in the King, Lords, and Commons" could "justly be exercised to secure, or preserve their dependence whenever necessary for that purpose." Such authority, wrote Dulany, "results from and is implied in the idea of the relation subsisting between England and her colonies." As Dulany quickly added, however, there could "very well exist a dependence . . . without absolute vassalage and slavery," and he was persuaded that the extent of that dependence could be located in "what the superior may rightfully control or compel, and in what the inferior ought to be at liberty to act without control or compulsion."19 The colonies might thus, as the Virginia lawyer Richard Bland acknowledged, be "subordinate to the Authority of Parliament," but they were subordinate only "in Degree" and "not absolutely so." "When powers compatible with the relation between the superior and inferior have by express compact been granted to and accepted by the latter, and have been, after that compact, repeatedly recognized by the former—when they may be exercised effectually upon every occasion without injury to that relation—," Dulany explained, "the authority of the superior can't properly interpose, for by the powers vested in the inferior is the superior limited." As free-born Britons, the colonists assumed, they could not be subjected to any but what Bland referred to as "a constitutional Subordination" to the parent state.20 But what was the nature of that "constitutional Subordination"? Where should the line be drawn between the authority of Parliament at the center and that of the colonial legislatures in the peripheries? The traditional view has been that during the Stamp Act crisis the colonists drew that line between taxation and legislation, that they denied Parliament's authority to tax the colonies for revenue but not its authority to legislate for the colonies. That neither the Stamp Act Congress nor many of the assemblies explicitly commented on Parliament's authority outside the realm of taxation seems to support this argument. Probably because "the issue of the day was taxation" and "Parliament at this time was not attempting to interfere in" other aspects of the internal affairs of the colonies, these bodies, as Edmund S. Morgan has observed, saw no need to consider Parliament's legislative authority in other areas, and "what the colonies insisted on most vigorously was that Parliament's supreme legislative authority did not include the right to tax." But the failure of most of these bodies to challenge Parliament's legislative authority outside the area of taxation by no means constituted an admission of that authority, especially in view of the explicit denial of that authority by several official bodies.21 Indeed, there is considerable evidence to suggest that the colonists' strong initial impulse was to exclude Parliament from all jurisdiction over the domestic affairs of the colonies. They claimed a right not merely to no taxation without representation butto no legislation without representation. Thus did the Connecticut Assembly in the summer of 1764 in its protest against the proposed stamp duties invoke that "fundamental principle of the British constitution that 'no law can be MADE OR ABROGATED WITHOUT THE CONSENT OF THE PEOPLE BY THEIR representatives.' " Thus did the Virginia Assembly in its petition to the king the following December claim for its constituents the "ancient and inestimable Right of being governed by such Laws respecting their internal Polity and Taxation as are derived from their own Consent"—a claim that was reiterated by the Virginia House of Burgesses when it adopted Patrick Henry's defiant resolutions in May 1765 and was repeated in one form or another in public resolutions by the legislatures of Rhode Island, Maryland, and Connecticut in September and October. Although the Massachusetts Assembly did not go so far in its resolutions against the Stamp Act, it unequivocably asserted, in a late October message to Governor Bernard its right to make laws for the province's "internal government and taxation." And that authority, it added, had "been never. . . questioned; but has been constantly recognized by the King and Parliament."22 Precisely what the several assemblies were claiming in 1764-66 when they denied Parliament's authority to pass laws respecting the internal polity of the colonies can be surmised from contemporary comment by several prominent political writers. These included the Virginians Richard Bland and Landon Carter, Rhode Island's elected governor, Stephen Hopkins, and the Massachusetts political leader Samuel Adams. An analysis of the works of these and other writers suggests that, as Bernard Bailyn has emphasized, the supposed colonial distinction between taxation and legislation was less important to the colonial attempt to demarcate the jurisdictional boundaries between Parliament and the colonial assemblies than the distinction between " 'internal' and 'external' spheres of government."23 Bland provided the most extensive and systematic exploration of this distinction. In The Colonel Dismounted, published in late October 1764, just a few weeks before the Virginia Assembly prepared to petition againstthe proposed stamp duties, he argued that because Virginians were entitled to all of the "liberties and privileges of English subjects, they must necessarily have a legal constitution," which he defined as "a legislature composed in part of the representatives of the people who may enactlaws for the internal government of the colony and suitable to its various circumstances and occasions." "Without such a representative," Bland made "bold enough to say, no law can be made." Thus, by definition. Parliament, in which the colonists were not represented, had no authority to pass laws for the "internal government" of the colonies without blatantly violating "the most valuable part" of the colonists' "Birthright" as Englishmen, the right "of being governed by laws made with our own consent." The constitution, said Bland, demanded that Parliament be excluded from "all power" over any colony "but such as respects its external government," and, he observed in a pointed reference to the proposed stamp duties, any law "respecting our internal polity which may hereafter be imposed on us by act of Parliament is arbitrary, as depriving us of our rights, and may be opposed."24 Fifteen months later, early in 1766, after Parliament had passed the Stamp Act and it had met with widespread colonial resistance, Bland enlarged upon this position in a second pamphlet. An Inquiry Into the Rights of the British Colonies. Once again claiming for the colonists the authority "of directing their internal Government by Laws made with their Consent," he argued that each colony was "a distinct State, independent, as to their internal Government, of the original Kingdom, but united with her, as to their external Polity, in the closest and most intimate league and amity, under the same Allegiance, and enjoying the Benefits of a reciprocal Intercourse." Though Bland did not make clear in either pamphlet exactly what matters were subsumed under the terms internal and external, his clear implication was that Parliament's authority—to legislate as well as to tax—stopped short of the Atlantic coast of the colonies and did not extend over any affairs relating exclusively to the internal life of the colonies. Such matters, according to Bland's formulation, were the exclusive preserve of the colonial assemblies. Implicitly, at least, Landon Carter, Bland's associate in the Virginia House of Burgesses, subscribed to the same general argument when, in four separate essays against the Stamp Act, he vigorously pressed the colonists' claim "of being solely governed and taxed by Laws made with the Consent of the Majority of their own Representatives, according to an Englishman's inherent Birthright."25 Nor were these Virginians peculiar in explicitly arguing that the limitations on Parliament's colonial authority extended to all of the internal affairs of the colonies, and not just to taxation. "The general superintending Power of the Parliament over the whole British Empire," four members of the Massachusetts Assembly, including Samuel Adams and James Otis, wrote a London correspondent in December 1765, "is clearly admitted here, so far as in our Circumstances is consistent with the Enjoyment of our essential Rights, as Freemen, and British Subjects." As Adams emphasized, however, that "general superintending Power" did not extend to the internal affairs of the colonies. Claiming "an exclusive Right to make Laws for our own internal Government & Taxation," Adams argued that if the colonists were "indeed . . . British Subjects, (& they never can brook to be thought any thing less) it seems necessary that they should exercise this Power within themselves; for they are not represented in the British Parliam[en]t & their great Distance renders it impracticable." Only if each legislature within the empire had an exclusive legislative authority within its own jurisdiction, the Massachusetts Assembly declared in elaborating this point, would it be possible to ensure "that equality [of rights and status] which ought ever to subsist among all his Majesty's subjects in his wide extended empire."26 Stephen Hopkins carried this point still farther. "In an imperial state, which consists of many separate governments each of which hath peculiar privileges and of which kind it is evident that the empire of Great Britain is," Hopkins observed, "no single part, though greater than another part, is by that superiority entitled to make laws for or to tax such lesser part." That was the reason, Hopkins believed, why each of the colonies had to have "a legislature within itself to take care of its interests and provide for its peace and internal government." Yet, like Bland and the Massachusetts representatives, he recognized that there were "many things of a more general nature, quite out of the reach of these particular legislatures, which it is necessary should be regulated, ordered, and governed." Among these "matters of a general nature," Hopkins included regulations concerning the commerce and good order of "the whole British empire, taken collectively," including "those grand instruments of commerce," money and paper credit. With regard to all such general matters, he thought it "absolutely necessary" to have "a general power to direct them, some supreme and overruling authority with power to make laws and form regulations for the good of all, and to compel their execution and observation." Within the British Empire, this general power, according to Hopkins, could be lodged only in the British Parliament.27 All of these writers thus agreed that, although Parliament had to have jurisdiction over what the New York pamphleteer William Hicks referred to as "all such general Regulations as could not be effected by the single Powers of any one Colony," the internal and purely provincial affairs of the colonies should remain under the exclusive authority of the assemblies. So long as Parliament confined its regulations to
"restrictions on navigation, commerce, or other external regulations,"
they reasoned, the "legislatures of the colonies" would be "left entire" and "the internal government, powers of taxing for its support,
an exemption from being taxed without consent, and [all] other immunities which legally belonged to the subjects of each colony
agreeable to their own particular constitutions" would thereby, according to the "general principles of the British constitution," remain
"secure and untouched." To govern the colonies "according to the principles of the national constitution," they thus insisted, required that they
be "vested with authority of legislation" over all provincial matters "and
have right to be represented in their Assemblies, in whom [alone] that authority" was "lodged."28
The underlying implications of the conception of the empire suggested by these writers were, perhaps, most clearly spelled out by
one of the colonists' supporters in Britain. "Our Constitution is so
tender of the Rights and Liberties of the Subject," wrote the anonymous author of A Vindication of the Rights of the Americans in 1765, "that
the People of England have their Repr[esentative]s, the Scotch theirs,
the Welsh theirs, the Irish theirs, [and] the Americans theirs, for they
have Assemblies and Parliaments, each of which represent the Bulk of
the People, of that Generality, or Division, for which such Assembly
or Parliament is appointed to be held." The reason why it was "necessary to have so many Houses of Representatives in the several Departments of Government" was "obvious." "In extensive Territories
not confined to one Island, or one Continent, but dispersed through a great Part of the Globe," he explained, "the Laws cannot be put into
execution, nor the Rights of the People preserved, without their being arranged into several Classes" of coordinate legislatures, each, presumably, having exclusive jurisdiction over the internal affairs of the
territory for which it was responsible.
As Tucker and Hendrickson have remarked, the "distinction between imperial and provincial purposes, between general and local areas of concern, between external and internal objects—the appeal,
in other words, to principles recognizably federal, came naturally to men on both sides of the Atlantic when forced, during the crisis brought on by the Stamp Act, to articulate the character of the imperial constitution." Such distinctions effectively described the pragmatic
and customary distribution of authority and functions within the em-pire as it had developed over the past century and a half. The colonists could not deny that Parliament had, during that time, occasionally passed statutes that "by express words" extended to the colonies.

Some writers attempted to explain those acts as measures submitted to at an early point in the history of the colonies when the settlers were "too much employ'd by their necessary Avocations, to examine much into the Minutiae of Government," and few had any doubt that such measures, though perhaps justified by "political reasons," were "in some measure an exception from the general rule by which British subjects (according to the constitution) are governed." Yet they had to admit that parliamentary restraints on colonial trade, commerce, and manufacturing were "what has been customary, and therefore chearfully submitted to." Historians have generally failed to realize that, according to British constitutional tradition, custom itself was a form of consent. But it was precisely because colonial submission to these general, external measures had been so long customary that they obviously could not, strictly speaking, be taken as violations of the fundamental principle of no legislation without consent.30 When Britain's American "Provinces [thus] claim[ed] an exclusive Power of making Laws for their internal Polity and Government," they were, then, simply asserting their right to whatthey had long enjoyed: as one writer phrased it as early as 1741, "a perfectinternal Liberty, as to the Choice of their own Laws, and in all other Matters that are purely provincial; under a Salvo of their inviolable Allegiance [to the crown], and Complyance with the Acts of Navigation." Notwithstanding metropolitan efforts over the previous century and a half to limit the extent of local self-government in the peripheries of the empire, "local provincial authority," as Bailyn has noted, "continued to characterize" colonial governance. In the exercise of metropolitan authority, crown and Parliament had, in fact, usually "touched only the outer fringes of colonial life" and dealt only "with matters obviously beyond the competence of any lesser authority" and with "the final review of actions initiated and sustained by colonial authorities." As Bailyn has remarked, all other powers—the vast area of "residual authority" that both constituted "the 'internal police' of the community" and "included most of the substance of everyday life"—"were enjoyed, in fact if not in constitutional theory, by local, colonial organs of government."31 In view of this situation, it was only natural for the colonists to conclude that, insofar as their respective internal affairs were concerned, there could be "no proper subordination of one part [of the empire] to another." "It has been a grand Error of the present Times to consider separate Governments as one," complained a Barbadian pamphleteer at the conclusion of the Stamp Act crisis. But there was "no natural Impediment," he added, "to my Imagination's suggesting to me a Form of Government in the People Abroad, as little connected with that of the English, as the Count[r]ies or Soils themselves which both People inhabit." Even though "Our Governments . . . are founded on similar Principles," he concluded, "this is no Reason that in all Points, whether similar or not, the Stronger must give Law." On the contrary. "In a confederacy of states, independent of each other, yet united under one head, such as I conceive the British empire at present to be," declared an anonymous writer in the Pennsylvania Journal in March 1766, "all the powers of legislation may subsist full and compleat in each part, and their respective legislatures be absolutely independent of each other."32 Although this analysis treated the crisis of the imperial constitution largely as a problem of identifying the proper allocation of authority, colonial spokesmen did not entirely ignore the knotty issue of sovereignty. The reader will recall that Grenville and his supporters had from the beginning seen that issue as fundamental, and from the point of view of the metropolis it would always remain "the intractable core of the controversy." At first, the colonists had some difficulty in dealing with the metropolitan charge that by challenging the authority of Parliament they were denying the authority of Britain. Indeed, many writers who denied Parliament's right to tax the colonies seemed to go out of their way to acknowledge its sovereign authority over the colonies. Eventually sensing the inherent contradictions in that position, however, a few writers explicitly denounced it. Thus, charged Philalethes in a New York newspaper in May 1766, those who had admitted "a sovereign jurisdiction in the Parliament over the Colonies, in all other respects but that of imposing internal taxes, for the purposes of raising a revenue" had thereby "betrayed the liberties of America."33 Looking at the whole subject more closely, a few proponents of the colonies focused more directly upon the question of precisely in what sense "the people ofAmerica" were "dependant on the people of Britain." They quickly concluded that, as Stephen Hopkins emphatically wrote, it would be "absurd to suppose that the common people of Great Britain have a sovereign and absolute authority over their fellow subjects in America, or [indeed] any sort of power whatsoever over them." And if it could not be shown that the inhabitants of the center were sovereign over those in the peripheries, it was "still more absurd to suppose," wrote Hopkins, that they could "give a power to their representatives which they have not themselves." If Parliament had "not receive[d] this authority from their constituents," Hopkins concluded, "it will be difficult to tell by what means" it "obtained it, except it be vested in them by mere superiority and power."34 But if Parliament was not sovereign over the colonies, what was the connection between the colonies and Britain? Building on John Locke's notion of the natural right of people "to quit the Society of which they are Members, and to retire to another Country," Richard Bland worked out an elaborate answer to this question. "When Men exercise this Right, and withdraw themselves from their Country," Bland argued, "they recover their natural Freedom and Independence: The Jurisdiction and Sovereignty of the State they have quitted ceases; and if they unite, and by common Consent take Possession of a new Country, and form themselves into a political Society, they become a sovereign State, independent of the State from which they separated." "No Part of the Kingdom of England" and, at the time of settlement, still "possessed by a savage People, scattered through the Country, who were not subject to the English Dominion, nor owed Obedience to its Laws," America, Bland asserted, was thus an "independent Country . . . settled by Englishmen at their own Expense" on the basis of a "Compact with the Sovereign of the Nation, to remove into a new Country, and to form a civil Establishment upon the Terms of the Compact." When he used the term "Sovereign of the Nation," Bland was pointedly referring to the king alone—and not to the kingin-Parliament.35 Bland was only one of many writers who thus suggested that the colonies had "no civil connection [with Britain], but by means of the King as the bond of union and the sovereign of both.” As the person who had initially granted the colonists "License ... to remove into a new Country, and to settle therein," the king, and not Parliament, these writers concluded, was "sovereign and supreme over the Colonies." Again, this conclusion conformed with colonial experience.

The colonies, as James Otis observed, had always been and still were wrote, it would be "absurd to suppose that the common people of Great Britain have a sovereign and absolute authority over their fellow subjects in America, or [indeed] any sort of power whatsoever over them." And if it could not be shown that the inhabitants of the center were sovereign over those in the peripheries, it was "still more absurd to suppose," wrote Hopkins, that they could "give a power to their representatives which they have not themselves." If Parliament had "not receive[d] this authority from their constituents," Hopkins concluded, "it will be difficult to tell by what means" it "obtained it, except it be vested in them by mere superiority and power."34 But if Parliament was not sovereign over the colonies, what was the connection between the colonies and Britain? Building on John Locke's notion of the natural right of people "to quit the Society of which they are Members, and to retire to another Country," Richard Bland worked out an elaborate answer to this question. "When Men exercise this Right, and withdraw themselves from their Country," Bland argued, "they recover their natural Freedom and Independence: The Jurisdiction and Sovereignty of the State they have quitted ceases; and if they unite, and by common Consent take Possession of a new Country, and form themselves into a political Society, they become a sovereign State, independent of the State from which they separated." "No Part of the Kingdom of England" and, at the time of settlement, still "possessed by a savage People, scattered through the Country, who were not subject to the English Dominion, nor owed Obedience to its Laws," America, Bland asserted, was thus an "independent Country . . . settled by Englishmen at their own Expense" on the basis of a "Compact with the Sovereign of the Nation, to remove into a new Country, and to form a civil Establishment upon the Terms of the Compact." When he used the term "Sovereign of the Nation," Bland was pointedly referring to the king alone—and not to the kingin-Parliament.35 Bland was only one of many writers who thus suggested that the colonies had "no civil connection [with Britain], but by means of the King as the bond of union and the sovereign of both.” As the person who had initially granted the colonists "License ... to remove into a new Country, and to settle therein," the king, and not Parliament, these writers concluded, was "sovereign and supreme over the Colonies." Again, this conclusion conformed with colonial experience.

The colonies, as James Otis observed, had always been and still were "entirely subject to the Crown." No laws could be made without the crown's consent "as* sovereign," and, because he thus exercised "an actual supremacy ... in every Legislation," there seemed to be no need for "a supreme Legislature, to which all other Powers must be subordinate." From these conclusions, it followed that the "Kingdom of Great-Britain" could claim no "sovereignty or supremacy over the colonies."36 A few writers pointed to the relationship between Hanover and Britain as a model for that between the colonies and the metropolis.

Although the colonists "still remain[ed] under the most sacred tie, the subjects of the King of Great Britain," Britannus Americanus remarked in the Boston Gazette in the late winter of 1765, the "people of England could have no more political connection with them or power and jurisdiction over them, than they now have with or over the people of Hanover, who are also subjects of the same King." Just as the Hanoverians "continued to be governed by their own Laws, under the general Superintendance and Controul of the supreme Magistrate in England, and his lawful Deputies and Officers abroad," declared another writer, so "with Respect to the Parliament, and the Power of imposing Taxes" should "all the Dominions of the Prince ... be on one and the same Footing." The colonists were thus "utterly unaccountable to, and uncontroulable by the people of Great-Britain, or any body of them whatever." Because the king was the "sovereign of America, distinct from the power and authority of the parliament of Great-Britain," an anonymous New York pamphleteer asserted, also in 1765, "no body, or set of men, but your assemblies or parliament here . . . can lay any tax, tallage or impositions whatsoever within this your dominion of America."37 If, at the beginning of the Stamp Act crisis, the questions, in Franklin's words, of "how far, and in what particulars" the colonies were "subordinate and subject to the British parliament" were "points newly agitated [and] never yet . . . throughly considered," that was no longer the case by the time of the repeal of the Stamp Act in the late winter of 1766. Over the preceding two years, the colonists had slowly begun to construct what John Adams called "a formal, logical, and technical definition" of the imperial constitution under which they lived. As a result of this "great inquiry," they had learned that, as Richard Bland put it, it was "in vain to search into the civil Constitution of England for Directions in fixing the proper Connexion be-tween the Colonies and the Mother Kingdom." The main underlying principles of that constitution were certainly relevant to their inquiry, but the British Constitution was not, in and of itself, suitable as the constitution for an "extended and diversified" empire.38 Instead, in their efforts to understand the nature of the relationship between Britain and the colonies, the colonists turned for guidance to the traditional rights of Englishmen and to their own experience with the actual pattern of customary relations within the empire as they had developed over the previous century and a half. They agreed with the Cambridge natural law theorist Thomas Rutherforth that the best "way of determining what form [of constitution] has been established in any particular nation" was to examine "the history and customs of that nation. A knowledge of its present customs will inform us what constitution of government obtains now," Rutherforth wrote, "and a knowledge of its history will inform us by what means this constitution was introduced or established." Indeed, one of the central conclusions of their inquiry—and one of the arguments they pressed most vigorously in their claims against the intrusion of parliamentary authority in the colonies—was that, like Britain itself, both the individual colonies and the empire as a whole had long-standing constitutional traditions that, at least from the point of view of the peripheries, seemed to supply legitimacy to their determined efforts to resist what Bland referred to as this "new System of Placing Great Britain as the Centre of Attraction to the Colonies."39 In 1764-66, only the most advanced thinkers among the colonists were willing to argue that Parliament had no role in either the imperial or the several colonial constitutions, to suggest that there was "no dependence or relation" between Britain and the colonies except "only that we are all the common subjects of the same King." All colonial protests did, however, have in common a clear concern to fix the boundaries between the authority of the center and that of the peripheries, between the power of Parliament and that of the colonial assemblies. If Parliament had a constitutional role in the empire, they were persuaded, that role had to be limited. They were virtually unanimous in agreeing that that role did not include authority to tax the colonies for revenue, and a substantial body of sentiment also held that it did not include authority to legislate for the internal affairs of the colonies.40 Whether they drew the jurisdictional boundaries between taxation and legislation or between internal and external spheres of authority, the attempt to draw them implied a conception of the empire in which authority was not concentrated in the center but was distributed among several distinct polities within the empire, much in the manner of the old English medieval empire and of the American federal system contrived in 1787. An expression of an impulse, manifest in the peripheries since the earliest days of English colonization, "to suffer as little interference by the metropolis as possible [in their internal affairs] while still remaining within the protective framework of the empire," this conception also strongly implied both the existence of a pragmatic distribution of authority among those polities and the need for some definition of exactly how those powers were distributed and precisely what underlying principles determined the system of distribution.41 The colonial case against the Stamp Act got a mixed reception in Britain. Better than most later historians, several metropolitan commentators realized that some colonists had not just challenged Parliament's authority to tax but had carried their objections "so far, as to dispute in great measure, [its] . . . Power of making any Law[s] whatever, that can be considered as affecting the Colonies internally.'' They also recognized that each assembly pretended "to an equality with the British parliament, and" allowed "no laws binding but those, which" were "imposed by itself." Few disputed "that the Colonists of any particular Province, have, in what Relates to their internal Police, a Right to make Laws, by their Representatives, on the same Principles, as the British-Parliament, provided" that they were "not repugnant to the Laws of their Mother-Country." Some writers were even willing to acknowledge that the assembly in each colony was both a "better judge of its own province than" Parliament ever could be and enjoyed "an exclusive legislative right" for "the conclusive regulating of their internal affairs." Moreover, in insisting that Parliament alone was competent to oversee and therefore had to maintain its authority to regulate "all general Affairs concerning the Colonies, as a collective Body, with Respect to Trade and Commerce, and all other Matters of a general Nature and Tendency," such people, in effect, also endorsed the colonial distinction between internal and external spheres of authority, with the former belonging to the colonial assemblies and the latter to Parliament. To people who thought in these terms, the relationship between the British and the Irish parliaments seemed to be an appropriate model for the connection between Parliament and the assemblies, an analogy that appeared to gain power because the constitutions of Ireland and the colonies were "not greatly dissimilar." To be sure.

Parliament had "plainly asserted" its sovereignty over Ireland. But it had also been "very cautious in the exercise of it, particularly with respect to internal taxation." In fact. Parliament had "constantly left to" the Irish "legislature the power of imposing taxes and regulations for the defence and interior police of the country." What the Irish example seemed to suggest was thus that, though the "legislative authority of every country must, in the nature of things, be all-powerful," "justice and wisdom ought, and will restrain the exercise of that power," and metropolitan "controll should be exercised with due regard to all privileges, laws, and judicatures." In short, as one writer observed, it was "a presumptuous, as well as unpopular thing, to depart from the antient forms of a state, and to go out of the usual road of government; and, without absolute necessity, should never be done." Wherever possible, the example of Ireland seemed to indicate, government should "every where" be carried on "in the usual constitutional channel, without infringing or violating the rights and franchises of any part of the British subjects." In Ireland, as in America, the "usual constitutional channel" seemed to be to give the local legislature effective control over all internal affairs.43 But most people in Britain seem not to have understood that the colonists' challenge to parliamentary authority went beyond the realm of taxation, and even with regard to this more restricted conception of the colonial position, only a few men in Parliament agreed with the colonists that there were limits upon Parliament's colonial authority. Chief among them were William Pitt in the Commons and Lord Camden, former attorney general and then chief justice of common pleas, in the Lords. Although Camden admitted that "the sovereign authority, the omnipotence of the legislature," was "a favourable [favorite?] doctrine," he argued that there were "some things it cannot do." Specifically, he declared, it could not act "contrary to the fundamental laws of nature, contrary to the fundamental laws of this constitution." In this formulation, Camden implicitly distinguished between ordinary law and fundamental law. Deriving either "from the Law of Reason and of Nature" or "from [the] Custom and Usage our own Constitution," fundamental law consisted of those "public laws" that "prescribefd] the form, and established] the constitutional power of the legislative body of the society." As Rutherforth had earlier remarked, such laws had been "usually understood to bind the legislative body itself, and not to be alterable by its authority."44 Among these fundamental laws, Camden, Pitt, and others of like mind argued, was the ancient British principle of no taxation without representation. Out of respect for this fundamental law, they contended, Parliament had "never levied Internal Taxes on any subject without their own consent." "The Commons of America, represented in their several assemblies, have ever been in possession of the exercise of this, their constitutional right, of giving and granting their own money," Pitt asserted. "At the same time," he noted, "this kingdom, as the supreme governing and legislative power, has always bound the colonies by her laws, by her regulations, and restrictions in trade, in navigation, in manufactures—in every thing, except that of taking their money out of their pockets without their consent." If few colonists had explicitly distinguished between Parliament's authority to tax and its authority to legislate for the colonies, for Pitt and Camden that distinction was thus crucial. In Pitt's words, it was "essentially necessary to liberty."45 Although there was substantial support in the pamphlet literature for these and similar arguments against the exertion of parliamentary power in the colonies,46 few people in power found such arguments persuasive. They both rejected the colonists' contention that they were not represented in Parliament and dismissed the argument that charters and custom exempted the colonies from parliamentary taxation. They acknowledged that the crown could grant charters that would protect the colonists "from violence or impositions, which might be attempted by authority of the prerogative of the crown" and thereby secure the "colonies . . . from the despotism of the crown." But they emphatically denied that "the constitution of Great Britain" empowered the crown to "grant an exemption to any subject of Great Britain, from the jurisdiction of Parliament." Because the constitution acknowledged "no authority superior to the legislature, consisting of king, lords, and commons," they argued, the crown constituted "but a part of the British sovereignty." "Considered as the executive power," the crown, by itself, obviously could neither "controul the legislature, nor dispense with its acts," much less put the colonies "out of the subjection to the summum Imperium of Great Britain." For that reason, it was evident both that "no Charter from the Crown" could "possibly supersede the Right of the whole Legislature" and that the king could not possibly "govern the Colonies, independent of his British parliament."47 Nor did custom seem to offer any more solid support for the colonial cause. At least some metropolitan commentators admitted that the "long uninterrupted Custom and Usage in the Colonies, of taxing themselves by Representatives of their own choosing; and also the Non-usage of the British Parliament in that particular" might appear to have become "a kind of possessory Right" that, in turn, "might naturally induce Persons, perhaps not thoroughly acquainted with the Nature and Constitution of our Parliament, to imagine the sole right of laying Taxes, belonged to themselves." From the perspective of the metropolis, however, the logic of the emerging constitution of parliamentary supremacy seemed to render absurd all suggestions of customary restraints upon the authority of Parliament. Any custom or usage to the contrary notwithstanding, "upon the principles of the Revolution," Parliament was "the only natural, constitutional Seat of compleat Jurisdiction in the Kingdom" and thatjurisdiction necessarily extended not just throughout the home islands but "over the property and person of every inhabitant of a British colony" as well.48 In making these arguments, metropolitan supporters revealed considerable confusion over the ancient question of the precise legal status of the colonies. Most seem to have fallen back on the position traditionally taken by crown officials in their recurring polemics with colonial assemblies over the previous century: that the colonies were equivalent merely to domestic corporations within Britain and as such could "have no . . . Pretence" to any "legal or constitutional Existence which" might "entitle them to greater Privileges than . . . the Corporations in this Kingdom enjoy[ed] by their respective Charters of Incorporation." According to this argument, "the mighty Powers of" the colonies' "little Assemblies" consisted of nothing more than a "Licence or Authority, flowing from the royal Prerogative of the Crown, to frame such Laws and Regulations, for the Management of their own domestick Concerns, as may best answer the Ends of their Institution." Such limited powers could not possibly justify the colonies even in claiming "an Exemption from . . . parliamentary Authority," much less operate "to erectthem into that State of Independency" that would justify their "placing their Indulgences in Competition with Privileges, Or, in other Words, setting up their Bye-Laws in Opposition to Acts of Parliament."49 Not everyone adhered to such a limited conception of the colonies.

Thus, Sir William Blackstone, in his celebrated and widely read Commentaries on the Law of England, the first volume of which was published while the Stamp Act was under consideration, characterized the colonies, like Ireland, as "distinct, though dependent dominions." Even those who thought of the colonies in this more expansive sense, however, tended to emphasize their dependence rather more than their distinctiveness. As Grenville declared in his speech introducing the Stamp Act, "all colonies" were "subject to the dominion of the mother country, whether they" were "a colony of the freest or the most absolute government." The very word colony, echoed Charles Townshend in the brief debate that followed, implied "subordination."50 The predominant argument in Britain was sounded by Lords Mansfield, Northington, and Lyttleton in early February 1766 in the House of Lords debate on the repeal of the Stamp Act. In specific answer to Camden, Mansfield flatly declared that, "as to the power of making laws," Parliament represented "the whole British empire" and had "authority to bind every part and every subject without the least distinction" in matters of taxation as well as legislation. That the colonists, as a result of their situation, did not "have a right to vote" for members of Parliament, according to Mansfield, meant not that they were exempt from Parliament's authority but only that they were "more emphatically subjects of Great Britain than those without the realm." "A free and extended empire," wrote an anonymous pamphleteer in making the same point, "are incompatible: to think they are not is a perfect solecism in politicks."51 From this point of view, colonial claims for exemption from parliamentary taxation seemed, as Grenville had defined them when he first proposed to levy stamp duties on the colonies, to be nothing less than a challenge to British sovereignty. As it had gradually developed over the previous century and a half, the conventional conception of sovereignty was that in all polities, including "an Empire, extended and diversified, like that of Great-Britain," there had to be, as Blackstone wrote, "a supreme, irresistible, absolute uncontrolled authority, in which the jura sumtni imperii, or the rights of sovereignty re-side[d]" and, as another writer asserted, "to which all other Powers should be subordinate^]Because, most contemporaries seem to have believed, the king-in-Parliament was sovereign in the British polity, it could accept no restrictions upon its authority without relinquishing the sovereignty of the nation over the colonies. By definition, there could be no limitation upon a supreme authority It was either complete or nonexistent. For that reason, it seemed obvious that the kingin-Parliament had full authority over all matters relating to all Britons everywhere. And for the same reason, it also seemed evident that no clear line could be drawn between Parliament's power to legislate for the colonies and its power to tax them. As Grenville noted early in the controversy, the claim of the colonists "not to be taxed but by their representatives" applied with equal force "to all laws in general," and if Parliament could not legislate for the colonies, the British nation no longer had any control over them. As the Connecticut agent Jared Ingersoll reported to his constituents in February 1765, the metropolitan establishment regarded the power to tax as "a necessary part of every Supreme Legislative Authority" and believed that "if they have not that Power over America, they have none, & then America is at once a Kingdom of itself."52 In the metropolitan view, there was thus no distribution but a concentration of authority within the empire: "as the sovereign of the whole," the king-in-Parliament had "control over the whole British empire." To most metropolitans, in fact, the colonial position appeared incomprehensible because it seemed to imply the existence of more than one sovereign authority within a single state, and sovereignty, according to conventional theory, could not be divided. An "Imperium in imperio"—a sovereign authority within a sovereign authority—was a contradiction in terms. As Lyttleton put it, the colonies were either "part of the dominions of the Crown of Great Britain" and therefore "proper objects of our legislature" or they were "small independent communities," each operating under its own sovereign authority. There was, according to metropolitan theory, no middle ground between these two extremes. Even those who, like Lord Egmont, held that the supreme power in any polity could delegate "to other subordinate powers a part of itself" and that, in such cases, "time" would "give to these subordinate powers a right of prescription" that could not be recalled "excepting only in the utmost emergency," also believed that "when the exigencies of government required it," Parliament, by virtue of its "supreme, absolute and unlimited" power, could levy taxes "upon the People not by right of their having representatives but [by virtue of their] . . . being subjects to the Government."53 The strength of colonial opposition to the Stamp Act forced Parliament to retract it, but repeal was accompanied by passage of the Declaratory Act, modeled on the Irish Declaratory Act of 1720 and asserting Parliament's authority "to bind the colonies and people of America ... in all cases whatsoever." But this fiat from the center by no means resolved the question of the distribution of authority within the empire. Even though the Declaratory Act stated that Parliament "retain[ed] the idea of right," people in the metropolis realized that "the circumstances of the repeal" stood as "convincing proof that . . . parliament" could not "execute it" and made it possible for the colonists to interpret repeal as "a full renunciation of the right" that left the colonies "atfull liberty." At the same time, the Declaratory Act powerfully impressed upon the colonists that Parliament had kept the door open to some future attempt to force them to acknowledge "Parliament's Right to tax us ... or that in every other Respect but Taxation, they have an absolute Right to make Laws to bind us without our own Consent."54 As Colonel Isaac Barre announced in the House of Commons early in 1766, the Stamp Act crisis had thus provoked "the people of America to reason . . . closely upon the relative rights of this country and that," and the undefined and "loose texture" of Britain's "extended and diversified" empire had fostered the development of two widely divergent interpretations of how authority was distributed between the center and the peripheries. Whereas most people in the metropolis thought the empire a unitary state "organized on the principle of devolution" with "sovereignty . . . vested in Parliament" and the authority of the colonies consisting "merely of privileges" that were always "subject to the discretion of Parliament and could, in extremis, be curtailed," most people in the colonies thought of the empire as being "predominantly federal in practice" with the authority of the center limited by the authority it had delegated to the peripheries.55 In this situation, many people on both sides of the Atlantic called for a permanent resolution of the constitutional issues raised by the Stamp Act, a solution that would "discover such Means of perfect and stable Connection with the Colonies, as may secure a just Authority over them, and at the same Time, preserve inviolable, the Privileges and Immunities" of the colonies. Some observers called for the creation of an intercolonial Parliament with full authority to tax and to attend to the general concerns of the colonies; others, with the example of the Stamp Act Congress before them, feared the establishment of such "a dangerous federal union" among the colonies. In the meantime, having learned from the crisis that the metropolitan government was too weak to force the peripheries to comply with measures the people there did not support, the colonists, as Francis Bernard reported from Boston in November 1765, "seem[ed] to be resolved that their Idea of their relation to Great Britain however extravagant various & inconsistent" should "be the standard of it." At least in regard to the "new" questions posed by the Stamp Act, the crisis of the imperial constitution in 1764-66 had taught them, as a New York writer phrased it, that "the People of England" understood "them not a whit better that we do in America.